# Notes (INF 3110) -  lecture, August 25th, 2014

Notes taken from slides [(link)](http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF3110/h14/undervisningsmateriale/intro.pdf)

## Intro

### Why so many programming langugaes?
- Problems are different in size, complexity and belong to different domains
- Different requirements to speed
- Programmers are different - lots of different tastes.
- Computer science is still a young science.

### What I will learn
- The functional paradigm and functional programming
	- ML will be the language of choice for functional stuff
- Logical programming (Prolog)
- General mechanisms of most programming languages
- Advanced mechanisms of object oriented languages
- Design and analyze languages on my own
- How to choose the correct language for the job

## General about programming langugaes
- A programming language is torn between the architecture's constraints, and the programmer's requirements.
- Programming is a way of capturing a domain and its phenomena, processing this data, and modeling this data in a domain specific way again.
- Programming ~= Modeling
- SIMULA was both - today's languages have diverged into modeling languages and programming languages
- Course will be on "General purpose Programming Languages" - not DSLs or machine code, or modeling
- Modeling = UML-modeling. More a "people to people"-thing than programming

### Paradigms (perspectives) in programming
- Procedural / Imperative programming
	- Sequence of operations manipulating a set of data items
	- "Java with only static methods"
	- Style was abandoned long time ago
- Functional programming
	- A program is regarded as a mathematical function
- Constraint-Oriented / Declarative (logic) programming
	- A program is regarded as a set of equations describing relations
- Object oriented programming
	- Program execution regarded as a physical model simulating a real or imaginary world.
	- "Scandinavian model"


### Issues in programming languages
- Scoping, lifetime of variables
- Block structure
- Static or dynamic binding
- Type system
	- Weakly or strongly typed
	- Static or dynamic typing, type inference
- Function / method calls
- Parameter mechanisms
	- Simple parameters (by value, by reference, by value-result, by-name)
	- Functions as parameters
- What kind of polymorphism, compared to overloading
- Multiple inheritance (or why not), alternatives
- Inheritance of behaviour, not only variables and methods
- Covariance and contra-variance
- Generics
- Functions, and functions as parameters

## Curriculum
- **John C Mitchell: Concepts in Programming Languages, 2003. Cambridge University Press. Isbn:0-521-78098-5.**
- Additional material as well!
- Weekly exercises
- 3 mandatory assignments
	- Solving the same problem with a functional and object-oriented approach
- **Look at the slides for lesson plan (and what we'll discuss)**
- We'll look at Scala as well!

## Homework until next lesson:
- Chapter 7 (Runtime stuff)
- _Read about state machines_
